Lessons of Management from Mahabharata – Human values and indian Ethos Skip to content Increase Font Size 1. Learning Outcomes 2. Introduction 3. Management lessons from Mahabharata 4. Summary 1. LEARNING OUTCOMES After studying the entire text students will be able to understand: Importance of Mahabharata Epic in understanding human values and ethics. Understanding various management principles from the epic Mahabharata. Application of the lessons of management in the real business world. 2. INTRODUCTION: Mahabharata is a story of great historical leaders in India. The basic theme of Mahabharata is ‘Dharamayudha’ that is justice for righteous. Mahabharata is story of battle between Pandavas and Kauravas for throne of Hastinapur. The battle was fought in Kurukshetra and Pandavas were victorious in the battle. Though Pandavas do not have wealth, power and kingdom at that time but they won the battle due to guidance of Lord Krishna, morals, ethics, effective management policies, powerful allies like love, compassion, sweetness, relations, decentralization of power, team work, women empowerment etc. The epic exhibits our human value system. The teachings of Mahabharata provide us the knowledge of management from its various incidents. Lord Krishna, the main hero is known as the master strategist, a visionary leader, a great crisis manager and a good path maker. Mahabharata is a good source of effective understanding of the various management traits to be used in modern management like planning the strategies, leadership qualities, motivation, decision-making etc. Lord Krishna is considered as the best Management Guru. Preaching of ‘Bhagvad Gita’ to Arjuna directly by Krishna in the battle field bring forth many management principles. Modern managers are really blessed to equip with such a glorious source of learning management principles. 3. MANAGEMENT LESSONS FROM MAHABHARATA The teachings from this great epic help us to understand the following management principles— 3.1 Scientific Skills and Technology From the ancient period of Mahabharata, technology and skill is being used by the Indians. The palace made by the Kauravas for the destruction of Pandavas was made of wax, which is highly inflammable material. It was not apparent from the outlook of the palace that it was made of wax. Even, in the palace of Pandavas, illusions were created to confuse the outsiders for the purpose of the safety of their palace. The weapons used in the war were very scientific. The modern technology used by the big business houses is based on these ancient scientific skills and knowledge. Moreover, corporate houses are able to use good infrastructure by conceiving the ideas from the history. Technology learnt today will certainly provide fruitful results. Thus, organizations must constantly improve their technology especially during the phase of growth. 3.2 Leadership Skills Centralized leadership may not give good and effective results. Corporate should concentrate on expanded management and decentralized leadership. They should restructure their teams to share management responsibilities. The sharing of responsibilities through decentralization will generate new ideas, innovative practices. This will help the team members to take responsibilities and grow higher. In addition organizations will earn more profits and achieve their goals in lesser time. In Mahabharata, Kauravas had centralized leadership there was only one head at a time of eleven divisions. Organizational Structure of Kaurvas On the other hand, Pandavas have opted decentralized system. Lord Krishna was the supreme guide. Arjuna was the supreme commander. Dhrshtadymna was commander in chief of seven commanders. The Pandavas made seven commanders for the seven divisions. The army of Pandavas was decentralized in to seven divisions called as Akshauhini. Besides, Yudhishtra, Bhima, Nakul, Sahadeva, Kunti and Draupadi also participated in management. Organizational Structure of Pandavas Other Decision takers of Pandavas The sharing of responsibilities by Pandavas resulted in democracy, less dependence on one individual and reduction in risk. Therefore, Pandavas were very much successful in their action plans as compared to Kauravas. This helped Pandavas in winning the war. In any company, top management should share the responsibility with middle and lower level management for the effective implementation of their plans and policies. 3.3 Common Goals and Team work Individual goals are difficult to achieve while group efforts of common goals can easily be accomplished. The main leaders of Kauravas i.e Bheeshma, Drona, Karna, Shalya etc. were focused on their personal goals., while Pandavas’ full efforts were towards the attainment of their common objectives. All of them took part in decision-making and contributed a lot in the planning of the battle. This unity and team-spirit made them successful in the war. Kauravas were equipped with more weapons and physical force. No doubt, Pandavas were less in number but their unity was their strength. They took the benefit of everyone in their army by making them efficient in their actions. A corporate house should get contributions from each and everybody being their part for enhancing their skills. 3.4 Commitment and dedication Pandavas were very much committed about their goals. All the brothers showed good sincerity and dedication for each other. Karan was also very much committed to his friend in spite of the fact that his friend Duryodhan was at fault. Gandhari the wife of Dhritrashtra was committed to his blind husband and she also lived her life as a blind. During the battle of Mahabharata, Pandavas win over Kauravas due to their commitment and dedication. Yudhishthra faced Karna in the battle knowing the fact that Karna will defeat him. The incident shows the commitment and dedication of Yudhishthra. There is also example of extraordinary commitment shown by Abhimanyu. Though he had partial knowledge of only breaking the ‘Chakarvayu’ even then he went in to the Chakarvayu to fail the mission. Therefore, managers should select the employees who are committed and dedicated. 3.5 Empathetic and effective communication Effective management necessitates empathetic and effective communication skills. A manager should not loose his temper and should try to manage each and every situation peacefully. Affectionate words used with full respect can do the wonders in effective management. Mahabharata’s incident highlights the importance of effective communication. When Gandhari wished to curse Judhishthra after the war, Krishna spoke in gentle words with full respect and empathy to Gandhari and give the message to forgive Judhishthra. Gandhari understood Krishna’s message and did not curse Judhishthra. Thus, effective and empathetic communication saved Judhishthra. 3.6 Forecasting future Mahabharata also give a wonderful management message of forecasting the future and taking preventive actions accordingly. In Mahabharata, when Ashwathama planned to kill all Pandavas, Krishna forecasted the danger in the future with his sharp observation and intellectual power and took all the Pandavas to Hastinapur to save their lives. Another episode of Mahabharata also indicate the need of future forecasting to take safeguard measures- when Bheema was going to search Ashwathama alone, then Krishna advised Yudhishthra to accompany Bheema to protect him. This was done on the basis of forecasting by Krishna that Ashwathama may use terrible ‘Brahamishra’ weapon on Bheema. Therefore, effective management needs simultaneously Pro-activity, Pre-activity, Process-activity and Post-activity. 3.7 Calculated Risk A fundamental rule of effective management is to take optimum level of risk and not to gamble. Firms should not put all their assets on risk. In gambling event, Pandvas loose Indraprastha, all their assets and even Draupadi. This was the worst situation in their life due to putting their each and every thing on stake. Perhaps this was the major cause of the balltle of Mahabhata. This incident teaches us the lesson of managing risk to avoid difficulties and closure of business. 3.8 The win-win approach The win win approach is another lesson that we learn from Mahabharata. This is the approach which every corporate advisors, management guru and professional consultant suggest to opt. This approach will lead to wellbeing of all the stakeholders and hence inclusive development. Every corporate should try to achieve inclusive development through every possible way like persuasion, reward, discrimination or threat. This may resolve all possible rivalries. Before the battle of Mahabharata, Krishna went to Hastinapur for conveying the message of Pandavas to negotiate an agreement for the wellbeing of all i.e. for wellbeing of Pandavas, Kauravas and whole community. He tried his level best for achieving a win win situation to avoid the battle of Mahabharata. 3.9 Strategic Management Strategic management is prerequisite for success of any corporate. Mahabharata illustrate very effective strategic management principles. During the war when Arjuna has to cut off the head of Jyadharatha then Krishna advised him to take off the head of Jyadharatha and let it fall on the lap of his father Vriddhakshatra because latter had a boon from Lord Shiva that the head of the person, who will fall the head of Jyadharatha on ground, will be broken in to pieces. Krishna had a lot of knowledge, information, idea and hence problem solving skills. On the basis of these skills he had given a wonderful strategic advice to arjuna. Arjuna implemented the advice and cut the Jyadharatha head and let it fall to Vriddhakshatra’s lap who was meditating at that time and Vriddhakshatra threw away the head unknowingly and head broke into pieces. In this way strategic management by Krishna saved Arjuna 3.10 Situational Management Mahabharata also teaches us situational management. Krishna a well renowned crisis manager tried to administer the situation many times in Mahabharata. One of the incident is illustrated here. Arjuna was saved from serpant weapon used by Karna to kill him through situational management technique opted by Krishna. Krishna pushed the chariot down in to the earth by one foot at the last moment. Due to pushing down of chariot, the serpant arrow hit the crown of Arjuna and fell on the earth without causing any harm to Arjuna. In this way situational management by Krishna saved Arjuna’s life. 3.11 Importance of Quality over Quantity Effective Management requires quality along with quantity. That Corporate can achieve high aims which focus on the quality of actions rather than those corporate which focus on increasing quantity without quality. In Mahabharata, Pandavas stressed on quality through ethics, commitment and morale values. On the fourth day, when Pandavas killed many Kauravas then, disturbed Duryodhana asked Bheeshma Pitamah about the cause of their defeat. Bhishma stressed on quality of actions which are crucially important in any situation. At that time Pandavas actions were very qualitative due to able guidance of Krishna which lead Pandavas towards success. 3.12 Right Mentoring In every difficult task, one has to seek advise of mentors. It is always advisable to choose a right person for this purpose who can show you the right path. The success of Pandavas was due to the guidance and continuous touch as well as support of Krishna, Bhishma, Vidura and other such dignitaries. Good managers must guide their subordinates effectively for growth of their organizations. 3.13 Understanding and Analyzing situations Features of good management are to perceive and deeply analyze the situation from small gestures. Duryodhna planned to kill all the Pandavas in Lakshagraha, but Vidura as their well wisher secretary conveyed the message to them. It was the intelligence of Pandavas who were able to understand his indirect message for them. Hence, they could save their lives. Promoters and management of a firm should know the market situations, perceptions of the consumers, investors etc but on the other hand Pandavas paid due regard to their values and truthfulness. This was the cause of their success mantra. Similarly, all management practices must be started with ethics. Initially, we may be in difficult situation but in long run we will be rewarded. Good ethical practices in a business can attract all the stakeholders. We can gain more goodwill, large number of customers, suppliers and high profitability. Institutes like Infosys are known for their trust and moral values. 3.14 Practice Arjuna has perfection in his work due to practice and experience. Karana also possessed the art of targeting arrow perfectly due to his continuous practice. They focused on their goals. It was regular practice, dedication and commitment of Arjuna which made him powerful during war and he defeated great warriors of Kauravas. After the loss of their kingdom, Pandavas tried to work on their weaknesses and learned new skills. Arjuna utilized the time during their exile to acquire new weapons. Yudhishthra acquired teachings from various Rishis and learned the game of dice. Business promoters must experience their products and plans in order to survive in long run. They need to concentrate on continuous improvement for the success of business. 3.15 Women empowerment Women empowerment means participation of women in decision making. Participation of women in decision making helps to view the situation in holistic way. Harmonious, feminine, sustainable traits of Women balance the aggressive and dominating masculine traits which help the organization to achieve higher and sustainable goals. In Mahabharata, Kauravas followed patriarchal structure. They didn’t involve women in decision making. Moreover they also dishonoured Draupadi. On the other side, Pandavas followed their mother Kunti who was the supreme authority. Yudhishtra obeyed the words of Kunti as Dharma Draupadi also participated in decision making. In fact, the war of Mahabharata was the result of disgrace of Draupadi by Kauravas. Women role in decision making helped Pandavas to win the war. 3.16 Loyalty One can succeed in long run in life only if he is loyal. Companies also demand loyal employees for their success. In Mahabharata, Karan remained loyal to his friend Duruyodhana even after knowing the fact that he is the eldest brother of Pandavas. 3.17 Being Impartial Efficient leaders should be impartial. Each and everyone should be rewarded according to his contribution. This will encourage team members to work harder. Yudhishtra was asked by Yaksha to choose the life of one of his brothers. He had chosen Nakul at that time because his two brothers Bhima and Arjun were born to Kunti and other two Nakula and Sahadeva to his father’s second wife Madri. Since he is alive Kunti is partially bereaved. Life of Nakula would partially bereaved the Madri at that time. Yaksha was impressed with the impartial decision of Yudhishthra and granted the life of all of four brothers of Yudhishtra. 3.18 Motivation Motivation is key of success. Managers should motivate and inspire team members for attaining effective functioning. When Arjuna was in confusion whether he should fight against his own cousins. At that time, he decided not to fight against his own relatives, and then Lord Krishna motivated him and guided him to choose the righteous action. This help Pandavas to won the battle of Mahabharata. 3.19 Right man for right job Efficient managers distribute work according to potential of members. Managers should efficiently utilize the potential, energies and capabilities of their team. Pandavas had efficiently utilised the energies of each and every member of their army. Moreover, Pandavas had chosen Lord Krishna instead of his entire army force because Lord Krishna is known as greatest crisis manager. He formulated all the strategies during the war which led Pandavas to victory. 4. Summary It can be summarized from above forth discussion that one should focus on all his deeds with pure heart. Purity of actions generates energy, excellence, economy as well as ecology along with preservation of ethics. This will lead to progress, success, welfare and hence sustainable and inclusive growth. However, any deed opposing values and performed under wickedness will lead to ego and greediness. This will further lead to anger and estrangement and hence cause destruction. Thus a good manager should learn lessons from one of the ancient epic Mahabharata. Efficient and effective management can be implemented with concentrating on values which will bring forth successful business ventures. The great epic Mahabharata teaches very effective principles of Management. If any situation will be managed with full commitment, loyalty, dedication with proper strategic planning then it will lead to efficiency and effectiveness. Empathy and love will add to this and will bring happiness. This further leads to prosperity and success which further bring forth inclusive growth. One lesson that each and every manager should learn from Mahabharata is collaborations because war or rivalry ends at destruction on both parts that is destruction at part of looser as well as gainer.